add postgresql functions concept (#5220)
Codecademy/docs: content/postgresql/concepts/functions/functions.md

---
Title: 'Functions'
Description: 'A PostgreSQL function is a reusable SQL code block that performs operations and returns results.'
Subjects:
  - 'Data Science'
  - 'Computer Science'
Tags:
  - 'PostgreSQL'
  - 'Functions'
CatalogContent:

>   - 'learn-postgresql'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - 'learn-postgresql'
```
Include only those course paths that are already available in the [catalog-content.md file](documentation/catalog-content.md). You can add one if you want it to get included in the PR.  Here `learn-postgresql` is not available in the catalog-content file so it makes it invalid to get included in PR.

  - 'paths/analyze-data-with-sql'
---

> **`Functions`** in PostgreSQL, also known as Stored Procedures, are sets of SQL and procedural commands stored on the database server. They enable us to perform executions within the database within a single function that usually require several commands and round trips.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**`Functions`** in PostgreSQL, also known as Stored Procedures, are sets of SQL and procedural commands stored on the database server. They enable us to perform executions within the database within a single function that usually requires several commands and round trips.
```

PostgreSQL supports functions in various languages, such as SQL, PL/pgSQL, C, Python, and more.

## Syntax

Here's the basic syntax used to define a function:

```pseudo

> CREATE [OR REPLACE] FUNCTION function_name (parameters) 
> RETURNS return_type AS $$
>    DECLARE
>       < variable_declaration >
>       [...]
>    BEGIN
>       < function_body >
>       [...]
>       RETURN { variable_name | value }
>    END; 
>    $$ LANGUAGE lang_name;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CREATE [OR REPLACE] FUNCTION function_name (parameters) 
RETURNS return_type AS $$
   DECLARE
      < variable_declaration >
      [...]
   BEGIN
      < function_body >
      [...]
      RETURN { variable_name | value } ;
   END; 
   $$ LANGUAGE lang_name;
```
Added semicolon at line number 32 for correct syntax.

---
Title: 'Functions'
Description: 'A PostgreSQL function is a reusable SQL code block that performs operations and returns results.'
Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Data Science'
Tags:
  - 'Functions'
  - 'PostgreSQL'
CatalogContent:
  - 'paths/analyze-data-with-sql'
---

**`Functions`** in PostgreSQL are reusable sets of SQL and procedural commands stored on the database server. They are also referred to as Stored Procedures. They enable us to perform complex operations within the database within a single function that usually requires several commands and round trips.

PostgreSQL supports functions in various languages, such as SQL, PL/pgSQL, C, Python, and more.

## Syntax

Here is the syntax for defining a PostgreSQL function:

> ```pseudo
> CREATE [OR REPLACE] FUNCTION function_name(parameters) 
> RETURNS return_type AS $$
> DECLARE
>     <variable_name> <data_type>;
> BEGIN
>    <function_logic>;
>    RETURN <value_or_variable>;
> END;
> $$ LANGUAGE lang_name;
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```pseudo
CREATE [OR REPLACE] FUNCTION function_name(parameters) 
RETURNS return_type AS $$
DECLARE
    <variable_name> <data_type>;
BEGIN
   <function_logic>;
   RETURN <value_or_variable>;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE lang_name;
```
```

- `function_name`: Refers to the name of the function.
- `[OR REPLACE]`: This option allows you to update an existing function, with the same name. If the function doesn't exist, PostgreSQL will create a new one.
- `parameters`: These are the input parameters that the function accepts. 
- `RETURNS return_type`: Specifies the type of value that the function will return.
- `AS`: It is used to introduce the function body. 
- `function_body`: It contains the logic of the function that will be executed when the function is called.
- `LANGUAGE lang_name` : Defines the name of the language in which the function is written.

## Example

> Suppose we have a table `employees` containing the employees' names and salaries, with the following records:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose we have a table `employees` containing employees names and salaries, with the following records:
```

---
Title: 'Functions'
Description: 'A PostgreSQL function is a reusable SQL code block that performs operations and returns results.'
Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Data Science'
Tags:
  - 'Functions'
  - 'PostgreSQL'
CatalogContent:
  - 'paths/analyze-data-with-sql'
---

> **`Functions`** in PostgreSQL are reusable sets of SQL and procedural commands stored on the database server. They are also referred to as Stored Procedures. They enable us to perform complex operations within the database within a single function that usually requires several commands and round trips.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**`Functions`** in PostgreSQL are reusable sets of SQL and procedural commands stored on the database server. They are also referred to as *Stored Procedures*. They enable us to perform complex operations within the database within a single function that usually requires several commands and round trips.
```

PostgreSQL supports functions in various languages, such as SQL, PL/pgSQL, C, Python, and more.

## Syntax

Here is the syntax for defining a PostgreSQL function:

```pseudo
CREATE [OR REPLACE] FUNCTION function_name(parameters) 
RETURNS return_type AS $$
DECLARE
    <variable_name> <data_type>;
BEGIN
   <function_logic>;
   RETURN <value_or_variable>;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE lang_name;

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
```

> - `function_name`: Refers to the name of the function.
> - `[OR REPLACE]`: It allows you to update an existing function with the same name. If the function does not exist, PostgreSQL will create a new one.
> - `parameters`: These are the input parameters that the function accepts. 
> - `RETURNS return_type`: Specifies the type of value that the function will return.
> - `AS`: It is used to introduce the function body. 
> - `function_body`: This field contains the function's logic that will be executed when called.
> - `LANGUAGE lang_name`: Defines the name of the language in which the function is written.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `function_name`: Specifies the function name.
- `[OR REPLACE]`: Allows updating an existing function with the same name. PostgreSQL will create a new function if the function does not exist
- `parameters`: These are the input parameters that the function accepts. 
- `RETURNS return_type`: Specifies the type of value that the function will return.
- `AS`: Introduces the function body. 
- `function_body`: This field contains the function's logic that will be executed when the function is called.
- `LANGUAGE lang_name`: Defines the name of the language in which the function is written.
```

> - `function_name`: Refers to the name of the function.
> - `[OR REPLACE]`: This option allows you to update an existing function, with the same name. If the function doesn't exist, PostgreSQL will create a new one.
> - `parameters`: These are the input parameters that the function accepts. 
> - `RETURNS return_type`: Specifies the type of value that the function will return.
> - `AS`: It is used to introduce the function body. 
> - `function_body`: It contains the logic of the function that will be executed when the function is called.
> - `LANGUAGE lang_name` : Defines the name of the language in which the function is written.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `function_name`: Refers to the name of the function.
- `[OR REPLACE]`: It updates an existing function with the same name. If the function does not exist, PostgreSQL will create a new one. 
- `parameters`: These are the input parameters that the function accepts. 
- `RETURNS return_type`: Specifies the type of value that the function will return.
- `AS`: It is used to introduce the function body. 
- `function_body`: This field contains the function's logic that will be executed when the function is called.
- `LANGUAGE lang_name`: Defines the name of the language in which the function is written.
```

> - `function_name`: Refers to the name of the function.
> - `[OR REPLACE]`: This option allows you to update an existing function, with the same name. If the function doesn't exist, PostgreSQL will create a new one.
> - `parameters`: These are the input parameters that the function accepts. 
> - `RETURNS return_type`: Specifies the type of value that the function will return.
> - `AS`: It is used to introduce the function body. 
> - `function_body`: It contains the logic of the function that will be executed when the function is called.
> - `LANGUAGE lang_name` : Defines the name of the language in which the function is written.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `function_name`: Refers to the name of the function.
- `[OR REPLACE]`: It allows you to update an existing function with the same name. If the function does not exist, PostgreSQL will create a new one.
- `parameters`: These are the input parameters that the function accepts. 
- `RETURNS return_type`: Specifies the type of value that the function will return.
- `AS`: It is used to introduce the function body. 
- `function_body`: This field contains the function's logic that will be executed when called.
- `LANGUAGE lang_name`: Defines the name of the language in which the function is written.
```

## Example

Suppose we have a table `employees` containing employees names and salaries, with the following records:

| employee | salary |
|----------|--------|
| Sarah    | 50000  |
| Bailey   | 60000  |
| Valeria  | 70000  |

> We want to create a function that calculates the average salary of all employees in the table. The function `avg_salary()` can be defined as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

We want to create a function that calculates the average salary of all employees in the table. The function `avg_salary()` can be defined as follows:
```

> We would like to create a function that calculates the average salary of all employees in the table. Our function `avg_salary()` , can be defined as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We want to create a function that calculates the average salary of all employees in the table. The function `avg_salary()` can be defined as follows:
```

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION avg_salary() 
RETURNS NUMERIC AS $$
DECLARE
    average_salary NUMERIC;
BEGIN
    SELECT AVG(salary)
    INTO average_salary
    FROM employees;

    RETURN average_salary;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```

Here the `average_salary` variable is used to store the result of the AVG(salary) calculation, where the function will return the average salary.

> To call the avg_salary() function and get the average salary, we can use the `SELECT` statement as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To call the `avg_salary()` function and get the average salary, use the `SELECT` statement as follows:
```

```sql
SELECT avg_salary();
```

> Thie above code will call the `avg_salary( )` function and return the calculated average salary of all the emplyees in the `employee` table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above code will call the `avg_salary( )` function and return all the employees calculated average salaries in the `employee` table.
```

- Define the datatype of the returned value after `returns`. The `return_type` could be a base, composite, domain type, or even reference a table column's type.

- The `AS` keyword is used when defining a standalone function.

- `function_body` contains the logic of the function that will be executed.

- `language lang_name` defines the name of the language that the function is implemented in. Note that PostgreSQL supports many languages including  SQL, C, PL/pgSQL, or the name of a user-defined procedural language.

## Example

Supposed we have a table `employees` containing the employees' names and salaries, with the following records:

 `employee` | `salary` |
 ---------- | -------- |
 Sarah       | 50000     |
 Bailey       | 60000     |
 Valeria        | 70000     |

We would like to create a function that calculates the average salary of all the employees in the table. Our function `avg_salary()` can be defined as follows:

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION avg_salary() 
RETURNS NUMERIC AS $$
DECLARE
    average_salary NUMERIC;
BEGIN
    SELECT AVG(salary)
    INTO average_salary
    FROM employees;

    RETURN average_salary;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;
```

> 
> 
> - The function name `avg_salary()` is declared following the command `CREATE FUNCTION`. It accepts zero parameters.
> - The data type of the returned value is `NUMERIC`
> - The code block containing the declaration and the logic of the function is placed between a pair of `$$`
> - In the declaration section, declare a variable `average_salary` that stores the number of films from the `employees` table.
> - In the body, use the `select into` statement to select the average salary of the employees and assign it to the `average_salary` variable. At the end, use the return statement to `average_salary`
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here the `average_salary` variable is used to store the result of the AVG(salary) calculation, and the function will return the average salary.

```

> Call the function to get the average salary:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To call the avg_salary() function and get the average salary, we can use the `SELECT` statement as follows:
```

---
Title: 'Functions'
Description: 'A PostgreSQL function is a reusable SQL code block that performs operations and returns results.'
Subjects:

>   - 'Data Science'
>   - 'Computer Science'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Data Science'
```

Tags:

>   - 'PostgreSQL'
>   - 'Functions'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - 'Functions'
  - 'PostgreSQL'
```

CatalogContent:
  - 'paths/analyze-data-with-sql'
---

**`Functions`** in PostgreSQL, also known as Stored Procedures, are sets of SQL and procedural commands stored on the database server. They enable us to perform executions within the database within a single function that usually requires several commands and round trips.

PostgreSQL supports functions in various languages, such as SQL, PL/pgSQL, C, Python, and more.

## Syntax

> Here's the basic syntax used to define a function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is the syntax used to define a function:
```

```pseudo
CREATE [OR REPLACE] FUNCTION function_name (parameters) 
RETURNS return_type AS $$
   DECLARE
      < variable_declaration >
      [...]
   BEGIN
      < function_body >
      [...]
      RETURN { variable_name | value } ;
   END; 
   $$ LANGUAGE lang_name;
```

In this syntax:

> * `function_name` refers to the name of the function.
> 
> * [OR REPLACE] option allows you to update an existing function.
> 
> * In `parameters`, list out the parameters that the function takes in. A function can have zero or more parameters.
> 
> * Define the datatype of the returned value after `returns`. The `return_type` could be a base, composite, domain type, or even reference a table column's type.
> 
> * The `AS` keyword is used when defining a standalone function.
> 
> * `function_body` contains the logic of the function that will be executed.
> 
> * `language lang_name` defines the name of the language that the function is implemented in. Note that PostgreSQL supports many languages including  SQL, C, PL/pgSQL, or the name of a user-defined procedural language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `function_name` refers to the name of the function.

- [OR REPLACE] option allows you to update an existing function.

- In `parameters`, list out the parameters that the function takes in. A function can have zero or more parameters.

- Define the datatype of the returned value after `returns`. The `return_type` could be a base, composite, domain type, or even reference a table column's type.

- The `AS` keyword is used when defining a standalone function.

- `function_body` contains the logic of the function that will be executed.

- `language lang_name` defines the name of the language that the function is implemented in. Note that PostgreSQL supports many languages including  SQL, C, PL/pgSQL, or the name of a user-defined procedural language.
```

## Example

Supposed we have a table `employees` containing the employees' names and salaries, with the following records:

 `employee` | `salary` |
 ---------- | -------- |
 Sarah       | 50000     |
 Bailey       | 60000     |
 Valeria        | 70000     |

We would like to create a function that calculates the average salary of all the employees in the table. Our function `avg_salary()` can be defined as follows:

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION avg_salary() 
RETURNS NUMERIC AS $$
DECLARE
    average_salary NUMERIC;
BEGIN
    SELECT AVG(salary)
    INTO average_salary
    FROM employees;

    RETURN average_salary;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;
```

> Breaking down the syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Breaking down the code:
```
